[SYCL][Doc] Simplify non-uniform group design (#14604)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_non_uniform_groups.asciidoc

Reviewer: Some comments on initial lines of this spec:

* May as well update the dependency from "revision 7" of the core SYCL spec to "revision 9".
* It seems like the Asciidoc attribute `{dpcpp}` is not defined.

These comments also apply to the other spec.

Author: Fixed in e28400dd696e27b7d9d87e6de0440e648cb17daa.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good if the overview would mention the classes and their difference. Suggestion change line 72 from
> This proposal introduces new classes to represent sub-divisions of ...
to
> This proposal introduces the `chunk` and `fragment` classes to represent a contiguous/non-contiguous sub-division of ... respectively.

Author: Done in 05382d76c3.

`root_group`, `group` or `sub_group`.

`is_user_constructed_group<T>::value` is `std::true_type` if `T` is one of:
`fragment` or `chunk`.

> Additionally, the `is_group<T>::value` trait from SYCL 2020 is `std::true_type`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the `is_group<T>::value` trait from the core SYCL specification is `std::true_type`
```

Future proofs for new versions of the core SYCL specification.  Same comment for the other spec.

Author: Fixed in b4461cb4d2b3c6c0f8c424e2d5fdd0184de070ec.

make assumptions regarding work-item scheduling and forward progress
guarantees.

> The following group functions support user-defined groups:

Reviewer 3: User-constructed instead of user-defined?

Author: Fixed in ebe85779e479e18f0776f270552c3796a7ade01b.

* `group_barrier`
* `group_broadcast`

> The following group algorithms support user-defined groups:

Reviewer 3: Same here comment about user-constructed here

- By calling the `get_opportunistic_group()` function.

[source, c++]
----
namespace ext::oneapi::experimental {

template <typename ParentGroup>
fragment<ParentGroup> binary_partition(ParentGroup parent, bool predicate);

} // namespace ext::oneapi::experimental
----
_Constraints_: Available only if `sycl::is_group_v<std::decay_t<ParentGroup>>`
and `ParentGroup` is a `sycl::sub_group` or `sycl::fragment`.

_Preconditions_: All work-items in `parent` must encounter this function in
converged control flow.

_Effects:_ Blocks until all work-items in `parent` have reached this
synchronization point.

_Synchronization:_ The call in each work-item happens before any work-item
blocking on the same synchronization point is unblocked.
Synchronization operations used by an implementation must respect the memory
scope reported by `ParentGroup::fence_scope`.

_Returns_: A `fragment` consisting of the work-items in `parent` for which
`predicate` has the same value as the calling work-item. This `fragment`
must have a group range of 2, and a group index of either 0 (if `predicate` is
false) or 1 (if `predicate` is true).

[source, c++]
----

> namespace ext::oneapi::experimental::this_kernel {

Author: This is just a result of designing these things at different times, and bikeshedding.  I've changed the name to align with the free-function queries in 9ec0f2b7d1.

fragment<sycl::sub_group> get_opportunistic_group();

} // namespace ext::oneapi::experimental::this_kernel
----

> _Returns_: A `fragment` consisting of all work-items which call this function

Reviewer 3: Should we clarify that all work-items from a sub-group the caller work-item belongs to?
Or do we consider that obvious by the fact that return type is specialized on `sub_group`?

Related to a comment above: do we ever expect this function to be extended beyond sub-groups and if so, should it be templated on a parent group (which can for now be limited to `sub_group` only)?

Author: Done in c41c4bed593870f41dfc675d16e6e54555082d8c.

I don't think we expect this function to be extended beyond sub-groups, which is why I made this simplification.  Some devices run the work-items within a sub-group "together" within a single hardware thread (i.e., in SIMD or similar) and it makes sense to be able to query which work-items are (for lack of a better word) "active" within a hardware thread.  Identifying which work-items are active should always be inexpensive, because the hardware thread and/or hardware already have that information somewhere.

Building an opportunistic group across sub-groups would almost always require communication between different hardware threads, so it would always be expensive.  It's also _much_ harder to define what it means for two hardware threads to encounter this function call "together" (e.g., does it imply that threads wait a certain amount of time to see if other threads show up?) and I don't think we want to open that can of worms.

}
----

[source,c++]
----
id_type get_group_id() const;
----
_Returns_: An `id` representing the index of the fragment within its parent.

[source,c++]
----
id_type get_local_id() const;
----
_Returns_: An `id` representing the calling work-item's position within the
fragment.

[source,c++]
----
range_type get_group_range() const;
----
_Returns_: A `range` representing the number of fragments created when the

> parent group was partitioned.

Reviewer 3: `get_opportunistic_group` does not explicitly define what a parent group is and it doesn't use "partitioning" term either, so I assume that definitions as such could be slightly confusing when it comes to fragments produced that way.

Author: I've tried to clarify this in a4b38be5d2.  I think we may need to revisit this wording eventually -- I would not be surprised if people asked us for a way to create a `fragment` directly from something like a mask, which would behave more like `get_opportunistic_group()` than a partionining.

[source,c++]
----
range_type get_local_range() const;
----

> _Returns_: A `range` representing the number of work-items in the fragment.

Reviewer 3: Can't comment there, but some of the descriptions below should be updated as well (see those fixes proposed in #13702):
- `get_local_liner_id` description is recursive
- `get_group_linear_range` and `get_local_linear_range` should return `linear_id_type`
- `get_group_linear_range` and `get_local_linear_range` descriptions should be "`range` returned by" instead of "`id` returned by"

Author: Fixed in cc24795326e7da667c927e701ec472e93ec67d6b.

known a priori.
The following example shows an atomic reference being incremented.
It is known that all the work-items will increment a reference to the same
location, but it is unknown which work-items will call the function.
We can opportunistically capture this group of work-items as they
arrive to this point in the control flow.

[source, c++]
----
template <sycl::memory_order Order,
          sycl::memory_scope Scope,
          sycl::access::address_space AddressSpace>
int atomic_aggregate_inc(sycl::atomic_ref<int, Order, Scope, AddressSpace> ptr) {

  // get the set of work-items that called this function simultaneously
  auto active_group = sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::this_kernel::get_opportunistic_group();

  // increment the atomic once on behalf of all active work-items
  int count = active_group.get_local_linear_range();
  int old_value;
  if (active_group.leader()) {
    old_value = ptr.fetch_add(count);
  }

  // return the value the individual work-item might have received if it had worked alone
  auto base = sycl::group_broadcast(active_group, old_value);
  auto idx = active_group.get_local_linear_id();

>   return base + idx;

Reviewer 3: Linear id index is 0-based, meaning that for the leader work-item it would look like it haven't performed an increment at all. Should it be `linear_id + 1` here?

Author: I think this is correct.  Operations like `fetch_add` return the value *before* the increment happens.

A common use-case for this is that you're using the atomic to identify the first empty location in an array.  The first result should be "0", and you shouldn't see a "1" unless somebody else incremented the counter before you.

Reviewer 3: > Operations like fetch_add return the value before the increment happens.

Oh, right, got it, thanks!

}
----

=== Chunk

A `chunk` represents a contiguous collection of work-items created by
subdividing a group into equally sized parts, such that each work-item is a
member of exactly one partition.
The size of a chunk is a static (compile-time) property.

==== Creation

A new `chunk` can only be created by partitioning an existing group with the
`chunked_partition` function.

[source, c++]
----
namespace ext::oneapi::experimental {

template <size_t ChunkSize, typename ParentGroup>
chunk<ChunkSize, Group> chunked_partition(ParentGroup parent);

} // namespace ext::oneapi::experimental
----

_Constraints_: Available only if `sycl::is_group_v<std::decay_t<ParentGroup>>`
is true and `ParentGroup` is a `sycl::sub_group` or `sycl::chunk`.
`ChunkSize` must be positive and a power of 2.

_Preconditions_: `ChunkSize` must be less than or equal to the result of

> `parent.get_max_local_range()`.

Reviewer 3: `chunk` does not define `get_max_local_range()`, but it can be passed as `parent`.

`sub_group::max_local_range()` returns `range`, but `ChunkSize` is `size_t`, we can't compare them, should we use `parent.get_max_local_range().size()` instead?

Author: I think this is just a bug, and it probably should have been `parent.get_local_linear_range`.  The second sentence about divisibility covers this, so I've just removed this sentence in 6679e8103b119d69b86f67a220a4b238f4c96ca9.

> `parent.get_local_linear_range()` must be evenly divisible by `ChunkSize`.

Reviewer 3: Both `get_max_local_range()` and `get_local_linear_range()` are non-compile-time-known properties, meaning that we won't be able to check if selected `ChunkSize` is correct. What is expected behavior if `ChunkSize` is incorrect? I assume that the behavior is undefined in that case, but should we mention that explicitly, or is there some generic phrase/approach (perhaps in the SYCL 2020 spec) saying that any violation of any preconditions is a UB?

Author: Right, any violation of preconditions is UB.  This is defined in C++: https://eel.is/c++draft/structure.specifications#3.3.

Reviewer 3: Thanks! I though something like this exists somewhere, but didn't know where

_Effects:_ Blocks until all work-items in `parent` have reached this
synchronization point.

_Synchronization:_ The call in each work-item happens before any work-item
blocking on the same synchronization point is unblocked.
Synchronization operations used by an implementation must respect the memory
scope reported by `ParentGroup::fence_scope`.

_Returns_: A `chunk` consisting of all work-items in `parent` that are in the
same partition as the calling work-item.

==== `chunk` Class

[source, c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

> template <std::size_t ChunkSize, typename ParentGroup>

Reviewer 3: We should probably update `linear_id_type` definition here, see the discussion about recorded inconsistency in #13702. Linear id type is smaller than chunk size, meaning that in certain cases we won't be able to enumerate all work-items in a  chunk.

Author: I see a few possible fixes here and I'm not sure what is best:

1. `linear_id_type = std::size_t`
Always matches, no problems.

2. `linear_id_type = ParentGroup::linear_id_type`
Sets `uint32_t` for `sub_group` and `size_t` for `group`. The situation where somebody provides a `ChunkSize ` larger than the `ParentGroup` would prevent enumeration of all work-items in the chunk, but that situation is already UB.

3. `linear_id_type = /* smallest unsigned integer with log2(ChunkSize) bits */`
Could use `std::uint8_t` for `ChunkSize` < 256.  Might lead to future ABI issues if we get something like a `std::uint4_t` in future (but that seems unlikely, given the number of bits in a byte).

Reviewer 3: I lean towards (2) here, because it makes `chunk` consistent with its parent group. I.e. if someone had a code for sub-groups, but then introduced some specialization for chunks, types of all IDs they may have in use would still match what APIs return. And this will also be true when we extend chunks to support `group`.

Author: Makes sense to me.  I made the change in 0f2a4712ee9fb65c52c6676d3d3a6e3ba55c253c.

class chunk {
public:
  using id_type = id<1>;
  using range_type = range<1>;
  using linear_id_type = uint32_t;
  static constexpr int dimensions = 1;
  static constexpr sycl::memory_scope fence_scope = ParentGroup::fence_scope;

>   operator fragment<ParentGroup>() const;

Reviewer 3: `ParentGroup` could be `chunk` here, but `fragment`'s description does not allow to use `chunk` as a parent group of `fragment.

Author: Good catch!  It should be valid to call `binary_partition` with a `chunk`, so I've fixed that in 3e1b00152a.

[source,c++]
----
operator fragment<ParentGroup>() const;
----
_Returns_: A `fragment` representing the same work-items as this chunk.

[source,c++]
----
id_type get_group_id() const;
----
_Returns_: An `id` representing the index of the chunk within its parent.

[source,c++]
----
id_type get_local_id() const;
----
_Returns_: An `id` representing the calling work-item's position within
the chunk.

[source,c++]
----
range_type get_group_range() const;
----
_Returns_: A `range` representing the number of chunks created when the parent
group was partitioned.

[source,c++]
----
range_type get_local_range() const;
----
_Returns_: A `range` representing the number of work-items in the chunk, which

> is always equal to `ChunkSize`.

Reviewer 3: Same comments as for `fragment` above:
- `get_local_liner_id` description is recursive
- `get_group_linear_range` and `get_local_linear_range` should return `linear_id_type`
- `get_group_linear_range` and `get_local_linear_range` descriptions should be "`range` returned by" instead of "`id` returned by"

Author: Fixed this above, in https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/cc24795326e7da667c927e701ec472e93ec67d6b.
